---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: "A Reflection on My Use of AI in ICS 314"
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2024-12-17
published: true
labels:
  - Software Industry Practice
  -  Artificial Intelligence
---

#A detailed analysis of my use of AI in learning software engineering

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;For at least my whole life, the internet has been a tool for students to go to when classroom material isn’t enough to fully understand a topic. To me, the use of AI is just the natural progression of algorithmic searching of study materials. AI has the ability to find helpful resources as well as put them to use by formatting them into writing, code, or even visual media as of recently. In terms of software engineering, it’s a powerful tool if used correctly. It has access to a massive collection of coding techniques and programming experience, even if it’s not able to necessarily understand the individual quality of it all. This can be applied to debugging or even creating code from scratch. I have mostly used Chat-GPT for several classes and even pay for the pro version. Before I continue, however, I must emphasize that either overusing AI or incorrectly utilizing it comes at a heavy cost, and I will elaborate specifically later.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;For experience WODs, I found them useful in terms of making them more manageable since they allowed me the time to understand what I was supposed to gain from them without spending time I could have on other classes just debugging or writing inefficient code from scratch. So to sum up, they streamlined the learning process for me, and I think the learning loss was negligible.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;For the in-class practice WODs, I believe it was recommended to not use AI, which I followed even though I wasn’t actually able to attend many. I found this to be quite effective since there was a set time limit and not finishing didn’t have a substantial negative effect. Then, having not used AI and failing, I knew where my weaknesses were and I was then able to strengthen those points or, worst case, supplement the weakness with AI.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Then, for the in-class WODs that actually counted toward my grade, I found success the more AI I used. Since the faster I went improved the grade, it was an efficiency test, and AI definitely improved that. I even had a few where I was worried I was using it as a handicap, so I used it less and it hurt my grade with no benefit to my learning whatsoever, so I’m glad that by about ⅔ through the class I was quite proficient at using AI as a tool rather than a crutch or having guilt about it.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I struggle with essay writing in general. I am a diagnosed dyslexic with poor time management skills. I wish desperately that AI was able to help me with this, but that hasn’t been my experience. Especially for the essays that are on my own personal experiences working with something, like the one we wrote about Bootstrap and React, even when I wrote the necessary information and asked it to expand it into an essay, that rarely worked to produce an essay I was satisfied with.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;For the final project, I felt like I really hit my stride with integrating AI into my bag of tools. I used it to write the skeletons of pages or functions and then used them as bases around the whole project. I also know that my whole team used it to debug quite effectively. I also used it to help myself use applications I’m not quite proficient with like Vercel. Unfortunately, I do think the use of AI did have some slightly negative effects on our project, however. I won’t name names, but not all of my teammates were beyond the “using AI as a crutch” stage, and they produced some noticeably poor code that we had to pretty much completely scrap and redo. Other than that, it was an excellent help to me. I asked it to redesign a product page for our final project at one point. I included images of what the page looked like and a mockup of what I wanted it to look like on Google Sheets and this was my inquiry:  
“hey, I'm making a store page in next.js, bootstrap, and react. I want to redo the page I currently have (the example I showed is for a ferret), and make it look like the one I mocked up (For the tiger, ignore the spreadsheet lines though). Here's the code I have for the current page, can you rewrite it to look how I want it to be?  
(current page code)”  
It flawlessly recoded the page for me so that I was able to spend more time on the designing and less time on the coding.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;For learning new concepts, I didn’t typically use AI as I’m pretty decent at self-teaching and had at least a surface-level understanding of most concepts we went over in class. I did have it explain how to import some stuff though if that counts.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;For answering questions in class, no specific examples come to mind, but I mostly looked things up if it was a question of vocabulary. Even then, I mostly just googled, but the AI explanation Google’s been using the past few months was usually what I saw first.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;For the “Smart Questions,” I actually used it to compare questions on their “Smart-ness” and actually found that I was incorrect in some of my initial categorizations. So I asked it for input and it didn’t have my biases. I didn’t ask as many smart questions in the Discord as I should’ve.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I believe I did ask it to provide examples of correctly implemented React elements like buttons. These technical elements that were written for me did actually teach me how to do it myself in the future, but seeing the example was an effective way for me to learn, as I’ve found.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I’ve actually used Chat-GPT to explain the code in the templates given to us in WODs countless times. The first example I could find was of the function addStuff given to us in the digits assignment. I code by copying old code very frequently and this technique of asking how specific parts of code work has been almost revolutionary. I am able to reutilize it in other areas and contexts.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I’ve had Chat-GPT write the entirety of a code on a handful of occasions, but the most memorable and successful time was converting a piece of code from Bootstrap to React. This works so well because I’ve already done all the work that AI is poor at. It also helped me turn code I understood into other code that I then consequently understood as well.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I definitely did not document my code as well as I should have. I genuinely forgot to consciously do it at all by a bit past halfway through the semester. Thankfully, Chat-GPT comments code by default, so if I got any credit for that it was thanks to AI.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;For “quality assurance” or debugging, I found Chat-GPT useful, and I actually have very strong opinions on the topic. All my teammates used it to debug our final project with varying degrees of difficulty and success. What frustrated me is when they’d use it in an inefficient manner. When I go to Chat-GPT for that kind of support, I give it the full context of what I was coding, what was happening, what I thought the issue may be, and then asked it for thorough explanations of the error messages or its fixes. Many of my teammates took the "What’s wrong with this code (Code Here)" approach, which deeply frustrated me.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I would say that AI streamlined my learning experience. I’m not sure that using it was superior to other methods, but it was certainly the most time-efficient method most of the time. For a few specific areas, it may have been best though, like for debugging. But for learning how to use Vercel and GitHub, I much would have preferred working with a real and experienced human.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I can’t think of many real-world applications of AI besides the general support it gives to development and efficiency. However, I can think of an example where it basically ruined a feature of a popular software. This year Spotify laid off most of its staff and began heavily leaning on AI. The issues weren’t noticeable until the Spotify Wrapped, which was an absolute mess. In this case, improper use of AI is harmful to the software engineering workforce as well as software itself.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I don’t think AI can replace a human teacher in many aspects. I do sincerely wish we’d spent more in-class time learning how to navigate software UIs for database stuff as well as project management in GitHub and VSCode. I think using it in assignments and projects heavily makes a lot of sense though. I also think the more content is created and published with AI (teaching material, curriculum, examples), the less effective AI will get as AI-created content will be put back into its reference database.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In conclusion, I think the use of AI has its time and place in software engineering and education. I think that teaching proper application and query crafting should be standard. To sum up, it’s an excellent tool, but even a wrench isn’t very useful when used as a hammer.  



